code walkthorugh (#95)
risc0/bonsai-foundry-template: code-walktrhough.md

# Walkthrough of the RISC Zero Foundry Template.

> This walkthrough covers the Even Number example provided with the RISC Zero Foundry Template. It is built with [Foundry](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry), a powerful set of tools for Ethereum smart contract development, including testing and deployment. The template leverages the RISC Zero zkVM to ensure the integrity of computations on the Ethereum blockchain. It includes a smart contract, guest code for off-chain computations, a publisher (CLI) application for interacting with Ethereum, and tests to ensure everything works as expected.

Reviewer: It's nice to have a standalone one-liner for the purpose of the document. Folks may skim over a full paragraph, but will usually read the one sentence.
```suggestion
This walkthrough covers the Even Number example provided with the RISC Zero Foundry Template.

It is built with [Foundry](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry), a powerful set of tools for Ethereum smart contract development, including testing and deployment. The template leverages the RISC Zero zkVM to ensure the integrity of computations on the Ethereum blockchain. It includes a smart contract, guest code for off-chain computations, a publisher (CLI) application for interacting with Ethereum, and tests to ensure everything works as expected.
```

## Guest code overview

> The guest code runs off-chain within the RISC Zero zkVM. It performs the actual computation to check if a given number is even, generating a proof of this computation. This code forms the basis for the off-chain computation part of the Ethereum zk-coProcessor.

Reviewer: In our writing, I've seen us going with "ZK-Coprocessor" as the canonical text
```suggestion
The guest code runs off-chain within the RISC Zero zkVM. It performs the actual computation to check if a given number is even, generating a proof of this computation. This code forms the basis for the off-chain computation part of the Ethereum ZK-Coprocessor.
```

### Guest code walkthrough:

```rust
use std::io::Read;
use alloy_primitives::U256;
use alloy_sol_types::SolValue;
use risc0_zkvm::guest::env;

fn main() {

>     let mut input_bytes = Vec::<u8>::new();
>     env::stdin().read_to_end(&mut input_bytes).unwrap();
>     let number = <U256>::abi_decode(&input_bytes, true).unwrap();
>     assert!(number.bit(0) == false, "number is not even");
>     env::commit_slice(number.abi_encode().as_slice());

Reviewer: I think it's helpful to include the comments and spacing, even though it makes the code section larger, as it's quite dense without those.
```suggestion
    // Read the input data for this application.
    let mut input_bytes = Vec::<u8>::new();
    env::stdin().read_to_end(&mut input_bytes).unwrap();
    // Decode and parse the input
    let number = <U256>::abi_decode(&input_bytes, true).unwrap();

    // Run the computation.
    // In this case, asserting that the provided number is even.
    assert!(!number.bit(0), "number is not even");

    // Commit the journal that will be received by the application contract.
    // Journal is encoded using Solidity ABI for easy decoding in the app contract.
    env::commit_slice(number.abi_encode().as_slice());
```

}
```

- **Input reading**: The code starts by reading the input data, which in this case is the number whose evenness is to be verified. This number is passed into the zkVM as a byte array.
- **Decoding the input**: The input bytes are decoded into an U256 type, which stands for an unsigned 256-bit integer. This is a common data type for representing numbers in Ethereum smart contracts due to its ability to handle large integers used in cryptographic operations.
- **Verification logic**: The core of the guest code is a simple assertion that checks if the least significant bit (bit(0)) of the number is 0 (indicating the number is even). If the number is not even, the assertion fails, and the zkVM will not produce a valid proof.
- **Committing the Journal**: If the assertion passes, the code commits to the journal (i.e., the output of the computation). The journal contains the encoded version of the number, prepared in such a way that the smart contract can easily decode it using Solidity's ABI (Application Binary Interface) decoding functions.

## Smart Contract overview

> While the RISC Zero zkVM enables developers to write off-chain logic as guest code, zkVM proofs (specifically a Groth16 SNARKs) get verified and incorporated into smart contract logic on chain. The end result is that the guest logic which checks if a number is even, is performed off chain but enforced on chain. This model extends to any program, however complex, which can be written as a guest program of the RISC Zero zkVM via Rust.

Reviewer: When I first read this, I was confused since I expect sentences with the structure "While ..., ..." to be pointing out a contrast between two things, or a caveat. I also see some minor typos, and think this could be more succinct.
```suggestion
RISC Zero enables developers to write off-chain logic as guest code, and verify zkVM proofs (specifically a Groth16 SNARK) in their smart contract logic on chain. Guest logic, which checks if a number is even, is run off-chain and enforced on-chain. This model extends to any program, however complex, which can be written as a guest program of the RISC Zero zkVM via Rust.
```

> The EvenNumber smart contract verifies a RISC Zero zkVM proof that a number is even.
> In this simple example, if a proof of an even number is verified, we will set that even number in the smart contract's state.

Reviewer: I believe this is intended to be another paragraph. If so, it appears there is a blank link missing for Markdown.
```suggestion

The EvenNumber smart contract verifies a RISC Zero zkVM proof that a number is even.
In this simple example, if a proof of an even number is verified, we will set that even number in the smart contract's state.
```

### Key Components:

> - **RISC Zero Verifier**: An interface to the RISC Zero verifier contract, which checks the validity of a zero-knowledge proof. The actual verifier contract would be deployed independently, and its address is passed to the `EvenNumber` contract upon initialization.

Reviewer: I don't really think the second sentence is helping to increase clarity. This is somewhat of an implementation detail, which is handled in the deploy script and is clear from reading the code below.
```suggestion
- **RISC Zero Verifier**: An interface to the RISC Zero verifier contract, which checks the validity of a zero-knowledge proof.
```

> - **Image ID**: Identifier for a specific zkVM guest binary (ELF) that the contract accepts proofs from. The image ID is similar to the address of a smart contract. It uniquely represents the logic of that guest program, ensuring that only proofs generated from a pre-defined guest program (in this case, checking if a number is even) are considered valid.

Reviewer: I like this analogy, to a smart contract address 👌. I think we should use that analogy more often in the Ethereum context

Author: Credit goes to @carterbrett

import {ImageID} from "./ImageID.sol";

contract EvenNumber {
    IRiscZeroVerifier public immutable verifier;
    bytes32 public constant imageId = ImageID.IS_EVEN_ID;
    uint256 public number;

    constructor(IRiscZeroVerifier _verifier) {
        verifier = _verifier;
        number = 0;
    }

    function set(uint256 x, bytes32 postStateDigest, bytes calldata seal) public {
        bytes memory journal = abi.encode(x);
        require(verifier.verify(seal, imageId, postStateDigest, sha256(journal)));
        number = x;
    }

    function get() public view returns (uint256) {
        return number;
    }
}
```
#### Constructor

The constructor requires the address of the RISC Zero verifier contract as an argument. This address is then set to an immutable variable, ensuring that the verification process always refers to the specified verifier. Finally, initializes the number state variable to 0, representing the initial state of the stored number.

#### Setting the Even Number

The **set** function updates the stored number, but only if the provided SNARK proof validates that the number is indeed even.

##### Inputs:
- **x**: The new even number to store.

> - **postStateDigest**: A hash representing the expected state of the zkVM after executing the computation.

Reviewer: Not for this PR, but I am really looking forward to when we can drop this from the developers' awareness 😅

- **seal**: The SNARK proof generated off-chain, proving **x** is even.

The function constructs a journal expected to match the zkVM's computation, encodes the new number **x**, and then calls the verifier's verify method with the proof (**seal**), **imageId**, **postStateDigest**, and the **journal**.
If verification succeeds (i.e., the proof is valid, and the journal matches), the contract updates the number state variable to **x**.

#### Getting the Stored Number

> The **get** function allows anyone to retrieve the current even number stored in the contract. It simply returns the value of the number state variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **get** function allows anyone to retrieve the current even number stored in the contract. It simply returns the value of the number state variable.
The number will always be even by the guarantees of the zkVM.
```

### Publisher Application walkthrough:

```rust
use alloy_primitives::U256;
use alloy_sol_types::{sol, SolInterface, SolValue};
use anyhow::{Result};
use apps::{BonsaiProver, TxSender};
use clap::Parser;
use methods::IS_EVEN_ELF;

sol! {
    interface IEvenNumber {
        function set(uint256 x, bytes32 post_state_digest, bytes calldata seal);
    }
}

#[derive(Parser, Debug)]
struct Args {
    #[clap(long)]
    chain_id: u64,
    #[clap(long, env)]
    eth_wallet_private_key: String,
    #[clap(long)]
    rpc_url: String,
    #[clap(long)]
    contract: String,
    #[clap(short, long)]
    input: U256,
}

fn main() -> Result<()> {
    let args = Args::parse();
    let tx_sender = TxSender::new(args.chain_id, &args.rpc_url, &args.eth_wallet_private_key, &args.contract)?;
    let input = args.input.abi_encode();
    let (journal, post_state_digest, seal) = BonsaiProver::prove(IS_EVEN_ELF, &input)?;
    let x = U256::abi_decode(&journal, true)?;
    let calldata = IEvenNumber::IEvenNumberCalls::set(IEvenNumber::setCall { x, post_state_digest, seal }).abi_encode();
    let runtime = tokio::runtime::Runtime::new()?;
    runtime.block_on(tx_sender.send(calldata))?;

>     Ok(())

Reviewer: This is really dense and pretty hard to read without any comments or whitespace to break things up.

- **ABI encode input**: Before sending the proof request to the Bonsai proving service, the input number is ABI-encoded to match the format expected by the guest code running in the zkVM.
- **Request proof from the Bonsai proving service**: The application sends the encoded input to the Bonsai proving service, requesting it to execute the *is_even* computation off-chain and generate the necessary proof.
- **Decode Journal**: Upon receiving the proof, the application decodes the journal to extract the verified number. This ensures that the number being submitted to the blockchain matches the number that was verified off-chain.
- **Construct function call**: Using the *IEvenNumber* interface, the application constructs the ABI-encoded function call for the **set** function of the *EvenNumber* contract. This call includes the verified **number**, the **post-state digest**, and the **seal** (proof).

> - **Send transaction**: Finally, the *TxSender* component sends the transaction to the Ethereum blockchain, effectively calling the *set* function of the *EvenNumber* contract with the verified number and proof.

Reviewer: I don't know if listing these separately in bullets below the code is better than providing more explanation in the comments in the code itself. It feels like more work as a reader to cross-reference these two.

Author: combined

# Walkthrough of the RISC Zero Foundry Template.

This walkthrough covers the Even Number example provided with the RISC Zero Foundry Template.

It is built with [Foundry](https://github.com/foundry-rs/foundry), a powerful set of tools for Ethereum smart contract development, including testing and deployment. The template leverages the RISC Zero zkVM to ensure the integrity of computations on the Ethereum blockchain. It includes a smart contract, guest code for off-chain computations, a publisher (CLI) application for interacting with Ethereum, and tests to ensure everything works as expected.

## Guest code overview

The guest code runs off-chain within the RISC Zero zkVM. It performs the actual computation to check if a given number is even, generating a proof of this computation. This code forms the basis for the off-chain computation part of the Ethereum ZK-Coprocessor.

### Guest code walkthrough:

> ```rust

Reviewer 2: Are we already (and/or is it practical to) testing code snippets like this in CI?
